---
title: "Building energy models with Morphological urban-scale parameters: a case study in Turin"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2020-BSA
venue: "Proceedings of 4th Building Simulation Applications Conference-BSA 2019"
excerpt: 'The scope of this work is to present two different models that make use of morphological urban-scale parameters to improve their performances, while avoiding the computational overheads of simulating building-surroundings interactions.'
date: 2020
paperurl: 
citation: 
---

## Abstract
With a growing awareness around the importance of optimization of buildings’ efficiency, being able to make accurate predictions of their energy demand is an invaluable asset for practitioners and designers. For this reason, it is important to constantly improve existing models as well as introduce new methods that can help reduce the so-called energy performance gap, which separates predicted from actual consumption values. This is especially true for urban scale simulations, where even small scenes can be very complex and carry the necessity of finding a reasonable balance between precision and computational efforts. The scope of this work is to present two different models that make use of morphological urban-scale parameters to improve their performances, while avoiding the computational overheads of simulating building-surroundings interactions. In order to do this, two neighbourhoods in the city of Turin (IT) are taken as case studies. The buildings present similar characteristics but are inserted in a different urban context. Several urban parameters are extracted using a GIS tool and used as input, along the building-scale features, for two different models: i) a bottom-up engineering approach that evaluates the energy balance of residential buildings and introduces some variables at block-of-buildings scale (e.g. sky view factor and canyon height to width ratio), ii) a machine learning approach based on the bootstrap aggregating (bagging) algorithm which takes the same parameters used by the previous model as inputs and makes an estimation of the hourly energy consumption of each building. The main results obtained confirm that the urban context strongly influences the energy performance of building located in high built-up areas, and that introducing simple morphological urban-scale parameters in the models to take these effects into account can improve their performance while having a very low impact on the computational efforts.
