## A GENTLE INTRODUCTION TO REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become rather famous in the last few years thanks to the introduction of massive improvements that allowed it to achieve previously unimaginable results: from the game of Go to Dota 2, RL algorithms reached human-level performances in many games and tasks. But what *is* this reinforcement learning and how does it work under the hood? The goal of this post is to give you an overview of the basic concepts behind it, and to let you familiarize with RL's terminology.

In general, when we talk about machine learning we refer to the ability of a computer to learn. The learning tasks are usually distinguished in three categories:

- **Supervised Learning**, where the goal is to find a function that maps some inputs to one or more outputs using several known inputs-outputs pairs.
- **Unsupervised Learning**, where we deal with unlabelled samples and we try to infer patterns within the data.
- **Reinforcement Learning**, which has a slightly different approach: we don't have a readily available database, but an environment that we want to understand in order to find an efficient way to achieve a particular goal. To collect the data that will shape our algorithm's behaviour, we need it to *explore* this environment and make different meaningful *experiences*.

While this may seem confusing at first, it is actually very close to what we experience in our everyday life. Imagine you are playing Tetris for the first time, and assume you have no previous knowledge about it. At every point in time, you have several elements: the image of the screen, which is the current **state** of the game, a set of possible **actions** like moving or rotating the brick, and possibly a feedback or **reward**, such as the points you get for filling a line. During your first attempts, you may want to randomly try different things and observe the results. You'll soon realize that stacking bricks vertically is not a good idea, as it leads to a game over (which is, a *negative* reward and the end of the round or **episode**). Completing a full horizontal line of bricks, on the other hand, gives you some points so you might want to keep doing it. Round after round, you'll eventually become quite good at the game, as you not only learn the rules, but also develop strategies to maximize your points. With very little conceptual differences, this is what RL is about. Note that, even if games are usually the first application that comes to mind and having a computer that can learn how to play Super Mario is an extremely cool thing per se, RL algorithms can be used (and are used) in an infinite number of situations, from stock trading bots to autonomous driving. 

### The core elements of reinforcement learning

While there are many different RL algorithms based on different approaches, we can identify some core elements that are common to almost every algorithm. It is important to familiarize with their names and to understand how they work, as they come up extremely often on RL papers and articles. 

- First and foremost, the **environment**, which is the context in which we (or, as we'll see later, our *agent*) can move. The environment can be seen as a function that takes an *action* (*a*) in a given *state* (*s*) as input and returns a *reward* (*r*) and a *new state* (*s'*). Additionally, the environment also tells us if the new state is a terminal state, or, in other word, if we have finished an *episode*. The end of an episode means that the environment is reset to its initial state (or to one of its initial states). Typical examples of a terminal state are the end of a match of chess, where one of the players won and the pieces are put back to their original positions, or the end of a level in a platform game, which leads to a new initial state, the starting point of the next level. Usually, the terminal state is indicated by the environment with an additional output, called *done* (*d*), that is a Boolean expression TRUE/FALSE which can conveniently be translated as 1/0 and used inside equations. Note that in some environments we may not have real starting and ending points, and this complicates things a little bit.
- One (or more) **agent** that decides which action to take at every step, observes the results, and learns how to behave in a particular environment with a trial and error process (we'll see how this is done in practice in the next section).
- A set of possible **states**, for which we have already built an intuitive idea. A state is nothing more than a numerical representation of what the situation at a certain step looks like. In the game of Tic-Tac-Toe, the current state can be a 3x3 matrix, where the empty slots are indicated with 0s and the occupied slots are indicated with either 1s for Xs and 2 for Os. This matrix can easily be flattened to a 1-dimensional element without losing information. For simple environments with a finite (and relatively small) number of possible different states, we can also map each state to a single integer, but in real world problems this is almost never feasible due to the dimension of the state space. In fact, describing a state without losing important information often requires a lot of parameters: in the previous Tetris example, the state was simply a capture of the screen. If we work in grayscale, each pixel can be translated into an integer between 0 and 255. Even if you crop the image in such a way that only meaningful parts of the screen are included, chances are that the list of possible states is some orders of magnitude larger than the available space in your RAM. 
- A pool of possible **actions**, which again have already been introduced. What we haven't said yet is that one can distinguish between environments with a *discrete* action space and environments with a *continuous* action space. The difference, as you might guess, is that in the first case the agent can pick its actions from a finite set (move left, jump, turn right), while in the latter it must specify a continuous value for its actions (rotate -10 degrees, apply a force of 10 N). In principle, it is possible to discretize a continue action space, however, this generally leads to a loss of precision. The nature of the action space is an extremely important constraint to consider when doing RL, as many algorithms can only deal with discrete actions.
- The **rewards**, feedback signals that tell the agent how good his decisions are: the higher the rewards, the better. In a chess match, capturing an enemy piece may return a +1 reward, while losing a piece might result in a -1 reward. Similarly, winning and losing the game might award +100 and -100 respectively. The goal of the agent is then to maximize the cumulative reward by favouring high rewarding actions and discouraging negative rewarding ones. While this mechanism looks straightforward on paper, it poses some problematics. First of all, the rewards are *sparse*: the agent might need to wait several steps before getting a nonzero reward, which makes it very hard for it to figure out which of its previous actions really led to that reward. The direct consequence of this sparsity is that the learning process is extremely slow (and sometimes even impossible) compared to supervised learning problems where all the data is available from the beginning. Another consideration to be made is how can we favour long-term choices of the agent over a greedy approach (that is, taking the action that leads to the highest immediate reward at every step) with such a signal structure? We'll see that this problem has a clever solution, which is introducing a *discount factor* *γ* (gamma). Finally, a reward gives an idea of how good a certain action is, but does not contain any information on how it compares to the other possible choices: avoiding an enemy in Super Mario is definitely a good idea, but jumping on his head might be even better.  So how can we encourage rewarding actions and keep gathering data on the rewards yielded by different behaviours at the same time? This is known as the *exploration-exploitation dilemma*.

Other important definitions are:

- **Timestep**: a timestep (*t*) is a cycle of (*state* -> *action* -> *reward*).
- **Experience**: given a generic time step *t*, an experience is a tuple *(s<sub>t</sub>, a<sub>t</sub>, r<sub>t</sub>)* , where the letters stand for *state, action, reward* at timestep *t*.
- **Episode**: the time horizon between the initial timestep *t = 0* and when the environment terminates at timestep *t = T* is called an episode.
- **Trajectory**: a trajectory is the sequence of experiences over a whole episode, denoted with the Greek letter *τ* (tau): *τ = (s<sub>0</sub>, a<sub>0</sub>, r<sub>0</sub>), ... , (s<sub>T</sub>, a<sub>T</sub>, r<sub>T</sub>)*.

To summarize, we can represent the RL process as a control loop where an agent interacts with an environment by observing its state and deciding an action accordingly. The environment listens to the action and transitions to the next state, which then passes to the agent together with a reward:

°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°° IMAGE °°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°

## RL algorithms

By now, you should have an idea of the main RL components and how they interact with each other. However, the most important question is still unanswered: in the end, *what* is an agent actually learning, and *how*? Generally speaking, there are three learnable functions in RL problems: 

- A **value function**, which measures the quality of the current state and available actions. To do this, it estimates the maximum expected future reward the agent will get at each state. The value function can come in two forms, V<sup>π</sup>(s) or Q<sup>π</sup>(s, a):
- A **policy** *π*, which is a function that maps states to actions.
- the **environment model** P(s' | s, a). 

---- AGGIORNA GAMMA!!!

## References